.\" See section COPYING for conditions for redistribution
.\"
.de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3 
..
.TH dune 1 2017-09-20 "white_dune 0.99rc766"
.SH NAME
dune \- graphical vrml97/x3d editor and animation tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
.B dune
[
.I variantoptions
]
[
.I stereoviewoptions
] 
[
.I inputdeviceoptions
[ 
.I axisoptions
]
[
.I miscoptions
] 
[
.I file.wrl
.I file.x3dv
.I file.x3d
.I url 
.IR "\.\.\."
] 
.P
.br
.B dune
[
.I conversionoption
] 
.I filename
.P
.br
.B dune 
.I \-illegal2vrml 
[
.I \-prefix prefix
] 
.I protofile.wrl file.wrl 
.IR "\.\.\."
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dune
/ white_dune is a graphical editor for the Virtual Reality Modeling Language 
(VRML97), ISO/IEC 14772-1:1997 and X3D.
.br
Additionally it has support for the NurbsSurface Node described in VRML97 
Amendment 1.
.br
It can also load X3D files with XML encoding, if it has been compiled
with the expat XML parser library.
.br
It can also download files from the internet (to ~/Downloads (default),
see "options->output setting"), if it has been compiled with the curl 
library.
.br
A filename of \fB\-\fP means standart input.
.br
Dune has some basic support for stereographic view usually with 
shutterglases in OpenGL "quadbuffer" mode.
.br
When used with the conversionoptions or the \fB \-illegal2vrml \fP commandline
argument, white_dune is a non graphical commandline program.
.br
The conversionoptions are used to convert the VRML/X3DV/X3D file into 
sourcecode or a other 3D graphics format. This options are used in the 
commandline, but some options require a graphics context (e.g. in the 
simplest case a usage within a 
.I xterm
command), cause some of the conversion options 
require the usage of OpenGL commands. To create a OpenGL context, there are 
3 different ways.
.br
First open a temporay graphics window, do the conversion and close 
the graphics window and exit. This is currently used under M$Windows.
.br
Second is to use Mesa off screen rendering (the program was
compiled with the --with-osmesa configure option). With Mesa off screen
rendering it is possible to use OpenGL commands in a pure commandline program.
.br
Third is to use glx based off screen rendering under Linux/UNIX/MacOSX.
In this case, the program do not open a graphics window, but requires 
a working X11 display anyway. On a text console the
.I Xvfb
X11 server program can be used to get a working X11 display.
.br
The \fB \-illegal2vrml \fP option is used to repair VRML97 files with 
illegal extensions.
.br
See the illegal2vrml(1) manpage for more information.
.P
.SH VARIANTOPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-4kids
start dune with a simplified GUI as simple 3D modeller for kids.
.TP
.BI \-x3dv
if no file is loaded, start dune with a new X3DV file. 
.br
Per default, dune is started with a new VRML97 file.
.br
If a file is loaded, dune prints a X3DV to standart out.
.TP
.BI \-kambi
start dune with support for unportable extension nodes only usable with
the kambi VRML gameengine.
.TP
.BI \-cover
start dune with support for unportable extension nodes only usable with
the special immersive VRML97 viewer cover/covise.
.TP
.BI \-x3dom
start dune with support for unportable extensions only usable with
the X3DOM viewer.
.TP
.BI \-4catt
start dune with a simplified GUI as a exporter/converter for users of the 
CATT 8 sound simulation software.
.TP
.BI \-german
Use german menu, dialogs and errormessages
.TP
.BI \-italian
Use italian menu and dialogs, errormessages are still in english language
.TP
.BI \-french
Use french menu and dialogs, errormessages are still in english language
.TP
.BI \-portuguese
Use portuguese 4kids menu, only helpfull with -4kids option, otherwise all
in english
.TP
.BI \-english
Use english menu, dialogs and errormessages. This is the default, it can be
used to overwrite the setting of the LANG environment variable.
.P
.SH CONVERSIONOPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-vrml97
Convert file to VRML97 ISO/IEC 14772-1:1997, write it to standart output
and exit.
.TP
.BI \-vrml97levelx3dv
Convert file to VRML97 ISO/IEC 14772-1:1997 compatible parts of 
X3D classic VRML encoding ISO/IEC ISO/IEC 19776-2:2005, write 
it to standart output and exit.
.TP
.BI \-x3d
Convert file to XML encoded X3D, write it to standard output and exit.
.TP
.BI \-X3DOM
Convert file to X3DOM html, write it to standard output and exit.
.TP
.BI \-download
Download file from the internet, write filenames to standard error and exit.
.TP
.BI "\-kanim filenamepattern"
Convert file to the kanim fileformat and write it to standard output.
.br
The kanim fileformat is a XML file with references to different VRML 
files. The VRML files are generated too, their name is generated based on
\fBfilenamepattern\fP: The filenamepattern is shortend from the fileextension
and then extended with a underscore, a increasing number and the \.wrl
extension.
.br
All VRML files describe the same VRML scene with same the nodes, 
but some numeric fields are animated.
.br
This type of file is used by the open source VRML based Kambi gameengine.
It makes no sense to export a kanim file, if the exported VRML file do not 
contain timesensor/interpolator based animation.
.TP
.BI "\-wonderland moduleDirectory"
Convert file to a java source file included in a directory structure needed
to build a SUN wonderland version 0.5 module and exit.
.br
If the root directory of the module is build from the input \fBfilename\fP 
(without extension) as \fBmoduleDirectory\fP/exportX3dv/\fBfilename\fP
.br
If this directory and the other needed files do not exists, this files
are also created. If the other files exist, they are not overwritten,
only the target java source itself is overwritten.
The name of the target java source file is 
\fBmoduleDirectory\fP/exportX3dv/\fBfilename\fP/src/classes/org/jdesktop/wonderland/modules/\fBfilename\fP/client/jme/cellrenderer/\fBfilename\fP.java
The first character of the target java source file is uppercase.
.br
To get a wonderland module from the 
\fBmoduleDirectory\fP/exportX3dv/\fBfilename\fP directory, chance into
this directory and run the \fBant\fP command. A usual jar file of the
wonderland module can then be found in the 
\fBmoduleDirectory\fP/exportX3dv/\fBfilename\fP/dist directory.
.br
When compiling the output of the wonderland java source export with the
command \fBant\fP, the java compiler may get out of memory resources.
.br
To fix the problem, you can either set the memory limits via the \fANT_OPTS\fP
environment variable to something like (bash/sh/ksh)
.br
.nf

   ANT_OPTS="-Xms256m -Xmx1024m"
   export ANT_OPTS

.fi
.br
or (M$Windows)
.br
.nf

   set ANT_OPTS="-Xms256m -Xmx1024m"

.fi
.br
or set the memory limits by extending the javac tag in the file 
wonderland/build-tools/build-scripts/build-setup.xml e.g.
.br
.nf

  <javac \.\.\.
         \.\.\.
         fork="true"
         memoryinitialsize="256m"
         memorymaximumsize="1024m"
  >

.fi
.br
This option uses OpenGL commands and can not be used in a commandline only 
environment.
.TP
.BI \-x3d4wonderland
Convert file to XML encoded X3D for import in SUN wonderland 0.4, write it 
to standard output and exit.
.br
SUN wonderland 0.4 only support IndexedFaceSets with colorPerVertex and
fullsize Color nodes. This exporter tries to convert other nodes to this
IndexedFaceSets, but can (currently) not correctly convert nodes with 
colorPerVertex false and fullsize Color nodes.
.br
This option uses OpenGL commands and can not be used in a commandline only 
environment.
.TP
.BI \-rib
Convert file to the RIB format (Renderman Image Bytestream), write it to 
standart output and exit. This option uses OpenGL commands and can not be used 
in a commandline only environment.
.br
The RIB file format is the input file format of movie renderers like renderman
or aqsis. 
.br
The RIB exporter do not support several features of VRML/X3D 
(e.g. TextureTransform).
.TP
.BI "\-files integer"
Only useful with the -rib option.
.br
Instead of writing the whole animation into the -o option file, create
\fBinteger\fP files with parts of the animation. This is usefull to run the
renderman renderer (e.g. aqsis) parallel.
.br
A example:
.br
 $ dune -o RibExport.rib -files 4 -rib Untitled.wrl
.br
 $ for i in RibExport*.rib ; do (aqsis $i &); done
.br
.TP
.BI \-ac3d
Convert file to the AC3D format (Version AC3Db), write it to standart output 
and exit. This option uses OpenGL commands and can not be used in a 
commandline only environment.
.br
The AC3D file format is the input/output file format of the 3D modeller
ac3d.
.br
The ac3d 3d modeller do not support several features of VRML/X3D 
(e.g. the ac3d 3d modeller do not support animation or interaction).
Therefore the AC3D file format can not keep the complete information of a 
VRML/X3D file in general.
.TP
.BI "\-catt8geo outputdir_with_material_geo"
Convert file to the catt geo format 
(Version 8), write it to several \.geo formats to the directory
\fBoutputdir_with_material_geo\fP and exit.
.br
The catt geo file format is the input geometry file format of the 
catt acustic simulation program.
.br
The master.geo file in this directory \fBoutputdir_with_material_geo\fP 
will hold include commands for the other produced \.geo files.
.br
In the directory, a file material.geo with the needed ABS commands
must exist before conversion.
The material names for the ABS names are generated from the DEF names of the 
VRML nodes.
.br
If the material.geo file do not exist in the 
\fBoutputdir_with_material_geo\fP directory, white_dune fails
with a errormessage.
.br
Despite the catt programm can export VRML97 files, it do not support several 
features of VRML/X3D.
.br
Therefore the catt geo file format can not keep the information of a 
VRML/X3D file in general.
.br
This option uses OpenGL commands and can not be used in a commandline only 
environment.
.TP
.BI \-ldraw
Convert file to the major part of the ldraw fileformat and write it to
standard output.
.br
The header of the ldraw file is not generated. The header is a important 
part of a ldraw file and should have been written to standard output
earlier (typically this is done from a batch script).
.br
The ldraw fileformat is a ASCII fileformat which is used to exchange 3D data 
between several open source plastic brick description programs. A example 
for such a program is LeoCAD.
.TP
.BI "\-prefix prefix"
The \fB-prefix\fP option in conjunction with conversion is only used for the
following options to create source code. It can be used to define a leading
prefix for the name of the data structures in the source code output.
.br
For example, the source code creates data types named "Node", "Scenegraph"
and "Callback". To avoid problems with other libraries, adding options like
for example "\fB-prefix\fP X3d" would change the names to "X3dNode",
"X3dSceneGraph" and "X3dCallback".
.TP
.BI \-c
Converts file to a C header/source file, write it to standard output and exit.
.br
See section \fBC/C++/JAVA SOURCE EXPORT\fP for more information.
.TP
.BI \-3c
This option is similar to the \fB-c\fP option, but surfaces are first 
triangulated and then exported as TriangleSet nodes.
.br
This option uses OpenGL commands and can not be used in a commandline only 
environment.
.TP
.BI \-c++
Converts file to a C++ header/source file, write it to standard output and 
exit.
.br
See section \fBC/C++/JAVA SOURCE EXPORT\fP for more information.
.TP
.BI \-3c++
This option is similar to the \fB-c++\fP option, but surfaces are first 
triangulated and then exported as TriangleSet nodes.
.br
This option uses OpenGL commands and can not be used in a commandline only 
environment.
.TP
.BI \-java
Converts file to a java source file, write it to standard output and exit.
.br
See section \fBC/C++/JAVA SOURCE EXPORT\fP for more information.
.TP
.BI \-3java
This option is similar to the \fB-java\fP option, but surfaces are first 
triangulated and then exported as TriangleSet nodes.
.br
This option uses OpenGL commands and can not be used in a commandline only 
environment.
.TP
.BI "-manyclasses"
Deprecated (now default)
.br
Only valid after the \fB-java\fP, \fB-3java\fP or \fB-wonderland\fP options.
.br
This option is a brute force attempt to fight against the "too much constants"
problem in java. It may be impossible to compile the output of a normal 
java based source code export, cause the current format of java class files 
are limited to 64K so called "constants". Not only real constants like 1, 2 
or 3 are counted, but also things like member variable definitions in 
classes etc.
.br
With the \fB-manyclasses\fP option, all data is distributed into many
seperated classes.
.br
The \fB-manyclasses\fP option should help, if you run into the 
"too much constants" problem. In case of a large number of DEF commands
in the vrml/x3dv file, you can still run into "too much constants" problem,
cause each DEF commands leads to extra member variable in the main
scenegraph class. In this case, you should reduce the number of DEF commands
with the menupoint
.I actions \.\.\. rest of scenegraph branch \.\.\. remove \.\.\. DEF name
.br
Beside the need to increase the memory limits of the 
.I javac
compiler (\fB-Xms\fP/\fB-Xmx\fP) options, you may also need to increase
the \fBPermSize\fP memory limits (\fB-XX:PermSize=\fP/\fB-XX:MaxPermSize=\fP)
of the 
.I java 
interpreter. 
.TP
.BI "\-o outputfile"
Writes the converted file to \fBoutputfile\fP.
.br
This is important if the converted X3D/VRML file is not in the same
directory as the orignal file (cause of relative paths in URLs like
in ImageTexture or EXTERNPROTOs).
.br
Note that \fB-o outputfile\fP must be used before the inputfile 
(\fBfilename\fP).
.P
.SH STEREOVIEWOPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-nostereo 
force non stereoview mode on Linux/UNIX (e.g. if you do not own shutterglases)
.TP
.BI \-stereo 
force stereoview mode.
.br
Stereo is only supported for hardware/software 
combinations, that allow quadbuffer stereo ("stereo in a window"), 
NOT splitscreen stereo (eg. "OpenGlVR").
.br 
Examples for hardware/software combinations with support for 
quadbuffer stereo are graphicscards with support for 
shutterglasses or "stereo cloneview" to connect beamers 
of a onewall.
.TP
.B \-anaglyph glassestype
force expermential stereoview mode for use with colored anaglyph glasses.
.br
\fBglassestype\fP can be red_green, green_red, red_blue or blue_red.
.br
This option uses the OpenGL accumulation buffer. This is not hardware-supported 
by a lot of graphics cards/graphics drivers and can result in miserable 
performance.
.TP
.B \-eyedist eyedistinmeter
Distance between the two eyes of the viewer.
.br
Default \fBeyedistinmeter\fP is 0.06, it can be negative to swap eyes 
(no need to reconfigure your hardware if eye swapping problems occure).
.TP
.B \-screendist screendistinmeter
Distance between the eyes of the viewer and the mid of the monitor screen.
.br
Default \fBscreendistinmeter\fP is 0.8.
.TP
.B \-fieldofview fieldofviewindegree
Overwrite Field of View field in VRML viewpoints and set to 
fieldofviewindegree in degree.
.br
Good stereoviewing may want need to ignore the fieldOfView field 
of viewpoints. The fieldOfView of the human eye is about 18 degrees,
the VRML default is 45 degrees.
.P
.SH INPUTDEVICEOPTIONS
The following options are only valid, if dune was compiled with matching
inputdevice driver support (e.g. there is not support for a Linux joystick 
under IRIX).
.TP
.B \-joystick joystickdevice \fP 
Only valid under Linux or M$Windows.
.br
Under Linux, \fBjoystickdevice\fP is the device of a Linux joystick 
(usually something like /dev/input/js0 or /dev/js0).
.br
Under M$Windows, the \fBjoystickdevice\fP is a number. Depending from
the M$Windows version, this number is either 0, 1 or a number from
0 to 15.
.TP
.B \-SDLjoystick joystickdevice \fP 
Currently only valid under MacOSX.
The \fBjoystickdevice\fP is a number (e.g. 0, 1, 2, \.\.\.).
.TP
.B \-spaceball spaceballdevice \fP 
\fBspaceballdevice\fP is the serial device connected to the spaceball
(usually something like /dev/ttyd2 or /dev/ttyS0).
.br
Only valid if binary was compiled with libsball support.
.TP
.B \-nxtdials usbdevice \fP 
This option support a dials like inputdevice made of mindstorms nxt motors.
Just attach a wheel or gear to each of 3 motors, connect them to the brick
and connect the brick to the computer via USB.
.br
This option is only valid, if white_dune was compiled with support of the
libusb library e.g. available under Linux.
.br
\fBusbdevice\fP is the number of the mindstorms nxt brick connected via
USB (0 for the first nxt brick, 1 for the second nxt brick, etc).
.br
The \fB\-nxtdials\fP option automatically set the wheel axisoption.
.TP
.B \-xinput xinputname \fP 
\fBxinputname\fP is the devicename supported by the Xinput Protocol
(usually something like magellan or dialbox).
.br
Valid on most Unix/X11 implementations.
.TP
.B \-xinputlist \fP
Print a list of Xinput devicenames that can be possibly used as 
\fBxinputname\fP for the \fB-xinput\fP option and exit.
.br
Valid on most Unix/X11 implementations.
.TP
.B \-xinputlistlong \fP
Print a list of Xinput devicenames with axis information and exit.
.br
Valid on most Unix/X11 implementations.
.TP
.B \-aflock\ aflockdevice\ \fP\ [\fB\ aflockoptions\ \fP]\ \fB\ \-tracker\ birdaddr\ \-wand\ birdaddr
.br
\fBaflockdevice\fP is the serial device connected to the 
Ascension Flock of Birds master transmitter 
(usually something like /dev/ttyd2 or /dev/ttyS0).
.br
Dune assumes the following configuration:
.br
Multiple FOBs with single RS232 Interface to Host Computer
(see "The flock of Birds, Installation and Operation Guide, 
Standalone and Multiple Transmitter/Multiple Sensors Configurations", 
Page 3 (chapter "Introduction"), Figure 2).
.br
\fBbirdaddr\fP is the adress of the Bird Unit of the magnetic head tracker
(\fB\-tracker\fP) or "3D Mouse" (\fB\-wand\fP) in the Fast Bird Bus 
(FBB adress) as configured with the dipswitches on the Bird Unit.
.br
This program need to have the Flock of Birds configured in the Normal 
Address Mode only (see Page 12, Figure 4 of the manual decribed above).
.TP 
.B \-headnavigation
Use current transformmode (including rotations) when using a headtracker.
.br
Default without \-headnavigation is using only the translation mode.
This default gives you a very natural reaction, when your head moves, 
the virtual world moves, but if your head only rotates, the virtual world 
stand still. With the headnavigation option, the virtual world reacts to 
head rotations, depending of the current transform mode. Be carefull when 
you use this feature while talking to a audience. Talking cause small and 
fast head rotations and will cause small and fast rotations of the virtual 
world.
Your audience may get a impression like in a earthquake and is more in danger
to get motion sickness.
.TP 
.B \-sendalways
Tell dune that the device sends (almost) always values. This values will
then not be interpreted automatically as transform commands.
.br
Automatically used for Ascension Flock of Birds device (\-aflock).
.TP 
.B \-dontcarefocus
Inputdevice actions dont care about the window focus.
.br
This can be useful in situations, when you only work with one dune window,
e.g. when using a onewall.
.P
.SH AXISOPTIONS
.TP
.B \-x|\-y|\-z|\-xrot|\-yrot|\-zrot=[\-][integer_axisnumber]
.B [,[factor][,[accel][,[wheel][,ignore]]]]
.TP
.B \-all|\-allxyz|\-allrot=[factor][,[accel][,[wheel][,ignore]]]
.TP
.B \-none=integer_axisnumber
.TP
.B \-axes=max_number_axes
.P
.SH AXISLEGEND
.TP
.B \- 
used to swap sign of value from axis 
.TP
.B  integer_axisnumber 
Integer with the number of the axis, that should be used for the 
x y z xrot yrot zrot directions.
.br
This number may not be greater than the number of axes of the 
inputdevice.
.br
The integer_axisnumber in the none option is used to disable this axis.
.TP
.B factor 
Float with a multiplicator for the axes
.br
The factors of the all, allrot and allxyz options are independend of the 
factors of the single axes.
.TP
.B accel 
Float with a expotential accelerator for the axes
.TP
.B wheel 
The string "wheel" means this axis of the inputdevice will not deliver zero 
if released
.TP
.B ignore 
Float with the value (relative to the maximal value
from the device) which will be ignored (insensitivity)
.TP
.B max_number_axes 
Number of used axes, one of (2,3,4,5).
.br
This must be equal or less to the physical available 
axes of a device. Main usage of this option is to disable 
bad designed or mechanical defect axes e.g. when you wish, 
this axis on a joystick would not exist
.P
.SH AFLOCKOPTIONS
This options are only valid for the Ascension flock of birds magnetic
tracking system.
.TP
.B \-baud baudrate
Baudrate of the serial line communicating with the transmitter.
.br
According to the flock of bird manual, the following baudrates are
valid for serial line communication: 2400, 4800, 9600, 19200, 38400,
57600 and 115200.
.br
Default: 38400
.TP
.B \-numbirds numberbirds
Number of "data delivering" birds attached to the transmitter (e.g. not 
counting the transmitter itself, if it is a Extended Range Controller (ERC)).
.br
Default: 2 (tracker and wand).
.TP
.B \-master birdaddr
Adress of the master transmitter in the Fast Bird Bus (FBB adress) as 
configured with the dipswitches on the transmitter unit.
.br
Default: 1
.TP
.B \-masterIsErc
Used to differ between configurations, where the master is a ERC 
(Extended Range Controller) or not. If the master is not a ERC,
the FBB adress is the same as the FBB adress of the tracker or the wand.
.br
Default: not set
.TP
.B \-hemisphere\ FRONT_HEM|AFT_HEM|UPPER_HEM|LOWER_HEM|LEFT_HEM|RIGHT_HEM
Hemisphere used. Sit on the antenna block (with the legs near 
on the side of the text) to see, what is left or right 8-)
.br
Default: RIGHT_HEM
.TP
.B \-sync 0|1
Synchronise (1) or not (0) data output to a CRT (Monitor) or 
your host computer.
.br
Synchronisation is used to elimiate magnetic effects of a Monitor 
using the CRT sync cable.
.br
Default: 0
.TP
.B \-block 0|1
Set (1) or do not set (0) the FNDELAY flag to the filedescriptor of
the serial port.
.br
Default: 0

.TP
.B \-filter AC_NARROW | AC_WIDE | DC_FILTER
Enable different filters. Read the Flock of Birds manuals for more 
information.
.br
This option can be repeated to use multiple filters.
.br
Default: no filter set, using filter set by Flock autoconfiguration.
.TP
.B \-suddenchangelock 0|1
Allow (0) or disallow (1) setting of messured position and orientation 
when a sudden large messurement occure.
.br
Default: 1
.TP
.B \-calfile calibrationfile
Use a VR Juggler style file to calibrate position messurement.
.TP
.B \-ignoresize delta
Ignore position jumps from flock bigger than delta.
This is much like suddenchangelock, but pure software based.
.br
Default: 0
.P
.SH MISCOPTIONS
.TP
.B \-tessellation integer
Set the default tessellation of NURBS and superformula based parametric
shapes to \fBinteger\fP.
.br
The meaning of tessellation decide how many edges are generated in one 
direction.
.br
A low default tessellation result in faster rendering of related shapes with 
tessellation set to 0 inside the white_dune application, but can give a 
reduced view, so details of a shape may be hidden.
.br
If no \fB-tessellation\fP option is used, the default tessellation is 32.
.TP
.B \-indirect
Forces indirect OpenGL rendering, even when 3D hardware rendering 
accelleration is available. In case of possible 3D hardware rendering 
accelleration this option can drastically slow down the program.
.br
This option is most usefull on machines with problematic graphic drivers
or halfbaken 3D desktop features like compiz.
.TP
.B \-nogllist
Forces OpenGL to render without glList commands.
.br
The use of glList commands can increase the rendering speed of static objects
(without morphing) dramatically.
.br
This option is only usefull on machines with errors in glList commands or
insufficent memory on the graphics card, so the use of glList commands 
would uselessly fail.
.TP
.B \-hidestandardtoolbar
Hide the standard toolbar.
This option is usefull on machines with small displays.
.TP
.B \-uninstall
Output information (if available) on the commandline, how the white_dune 
application can be uninstalled and exit.
.br
Under Micro$oft Windows it additionally clears all information activly set 
by white_dune (under HKEY_CURRENT_USER) in the Windows registry.
.TP
.B \-checkSimpleCyclicSceneGraph
A cyclic scenegraph is caused by a node, which contains itself (in form
of a USE command of itself) in its scenegraph branch.
.br
Cyclic scenegraphs are illegal in VRML97/X3D, tools reading such a file
may loop infinitely or eat up all the memory and then crash.
Nevertheless some tools (or people) tend to generate such cyclic scenegraphs. 
White_dune is able to detect one depth cyclic scenegraphs,
but the detection can result in a performance problem when loading huge
VRML97/X3D files. Therefore white_dune do not check for cyclic scenegraphs
by default. If white_dune loops infinitely or crashes after a long time
while loading a VRML/X3D file, a cyclic scenegraph shoud be supposed and
this option should be used. 
.TP
.B \-scriptHeaderC header
It is possible to use Script nodes in C source export. The url field in
Script nodes ships code from computer languages. If one string points to
a file (e.g. a java class file), this file is executed to process events.
Beside that, it is also possible to inline source code below a header.
The default header for inlined code for the C source export is "c:".
The VRML/X3D standard do not restrict the usage of various programming 
languages in the Script node.
.br
This option changes this \fBheader\fP to avoid name clashes with other
tools using the default header in a different context.
.TP
.B \-scriptHeaderC++ header
It is possible to use Script nodes in C++ source export. The url field in
Script nodes ships code from computer languages. If one string points to
a file (e.g. a java class file), this file is executed to process events.
Beside that, it is also possible to inline source code below a header.
The default header for inlined code for the C++ source export is "c++:".
The VRML/X3D standard do not restrict the usage of various programming 
languages in the Script node.
.br
This option changes this \fBheader\fP to avoid name clashes with other
tools using the default header in a different context.
.TP
.B \-scriptHeaderJava header
It is possible to use Script nodes in java source export. The url field in
Script nodes ships code from computer languages. If one string points to
a file (e.g. a java class file), this file is executed to process events.
Beside that, it is also possible to inline source code below a header.
The default header for inlined code for the java source export is "java:".
The VRML/X3D standard do not restrict the usage of various programming 
languages in the Script node.
.br
This option changes this \fBheader\fP to avoid name clashes with other
tools using the default header in a different context.
.TP
.B \-psn_???
Only valid under MacOSX.
.br
Options starting with the string "-psn_" are generated by the Aqua 
desktop under on some versions of MacOSX and are silently ignored.
.TP
.B \-exitPid pid
Only valid under MacOSX.
.br
Needed for the Aqua desktop of MacOSX to kill the whitedune starter program
on exit.
.TP
.B \-fn font
Only valid under Linux/UNIX/MacOSX.
.br
Set the unix font. Check for valid fonts with the xlsfonts(1) command.
.TP
.B \-demomode timeout
This options is intended for running the program as eyecatcher eg. on a fair.
.br
The option is only usefull, if a viewpoint animation is running.
In case of input from the mouse (mouseclick), keyboard or a 3D inputdevice, 
the animation is stopped an the user can navigate through the 3D world.
.br
\fBtimeout\fP seconds after the last input, the viewpoint animation is not
supressed anymore.
.TP
.B \-filedialogdir directory
Change to a specific \fBdirectory\fP before opening a filedialog.
.TP
.B \-proto category protofile
Adds the VRML PROTO in the file \fBprotofile\fP to the list of available
PROTOs in the create => proto menu in the \fBcategory\fP submenu and exit.
.TP
.B \-renderslower
This option uses a slower render mode.
.TP
.B \--version
Print out version information and exit.
.TP
.B \--copyrightdetails
Print out detailed copyright informations and exit.
.P
.SH MOUSE/KEYS
In the 3D view, dune support the following mouse / keyboard commands:
.TP
Mouse Button 1 click:
.br
Select objects/3D handlers (e.g. arrows or white boxes) under the cursor 
(or under the top of 3D cursor in stereoview)
.br
.TP
Mouse Button 2 click:
.br
Additionly select white box 3D handlers under the cursor 
(or under the top of 3D cursor in stereoview)
.br
.TP
Mouse Button 1 drag:
.br
Drag objects/3D handles around
.br
.TP
Mouse Button 3 drag:
.br
Select multiple 3D handles
.br
.TP
CTRL-Mouse Button 1 drag:
.br
Virtual trackball navigation 
.br
.TP
SHIFT-Mouse Button 1 drag:
.br
Forward/backward navigation 
.br
.TP
CTRL+SHIFT-Mouse Button 1 drag:
.br
up/down/left/right navigation 
.br
.TP
ALT-Mouse Button 1 drag: (SGI style)
.br
Virtual trackball navigation 
.br
.TP
ALT-Mouse Button 2 drag: (SGI style)
.br
up/down/left/right navigation 
.br
.TP
ALT-Mouse Button 1+2 drag: (SGI style)
.br
forward/backward navigation 
.br
.TP
Navigation icon pressed-Mouse Button 1 drag: 
.br
Virtual trackball navigation 
.br
.TP
Navigation icon pressed-Mouse Button 2 drag:
.br
forward/backward navigation 
.br
.TP
Navigation icon-Mouse Button 1+2 drag:
.br
up/down/left/right navigation 
.br
.TP
In the route view, dune support the following mouse / keyboard commands:
.P
.TP
Mouse Button 1 click to event socket of a node and drag to a matching event 
socket:
.br
create a ROUTE connection
.TP
Mouse Button 1 click to nothing and drag:
.br
cut a ROUTE connection
.TP
Mouse Button 1 click to a node and drag:
.br
move node in the route view
.TP
Mouse Button 1 click to a node, hold Mouse Button1, pressing Page Up/Down key
move node in the route view by one page
(works only on correct motif/lesstif implementations)
.br
.TP
Information about other keyboard usage can be found in the toolbar.
.TP
Tips how to use dune can be found in the docs directory of dune
.SH C/C++/JAVA SOURCE EXPORT
.P
.LP
The export to source code is a mainly a export of the information (numbers 
and strings) of the VRML/X3D scenegraph tree.
.br
White_dune do not export something like C source with OpenGL commands.
The exported code is independend of any rendering engine, but should be
usable with any 3D API.
.br
Additional code is needed to render the scenegraph with a 3D API.
Currently white_dune comes with only two sets of such additinal code for the 
Java Monkey Engine (JME) and C/C++ OpenGL. 
This code can be used as a model for writing code for additional renderengines.
.br
The information of the scenegraph is written into a class/struct with a
name concatinated from the string of the \fBprefix\fP argument (default "X3d")
and the string "SceneGraph". The scenegraph class/struct is filled with
references to the different VRML/X3D commands ("nodes"). The name of the
type of such a node is concatinated from the string of the \fBprefix\fP 
argument (default "X3d") and "Node". Each node type contains the data
of the VRML/X3D node in variables named in the same way as the VRML/X3D
fields.
.br
The following table shows the mapping from the VRML/X3D field type to the 
C, C++ and java datatypes:

.TS 
tab (;) ;
l | l | l | l.
 VRML/X3D datatype;C datatype;C++ datatype;java datatype 
=
 SFBool;short;bool;boolean
 SFInt32;int;int;int
 SFImage;int*;int*;int[]
 SFFloat;float;float;float
 SFVec2f;float[2];float[2];float[2]
 SFVec3f;float[3];float[3];float[3]
 SFVec4f;float[4];float[4];float[4]
 SFRotation;float[4];float[4];float[4]
 SFMatrix3f;float[9];float[9];float[9]
 SFMatrix4f;float[16];float[16];float[16]
 SFColor;float[3];float[3];float[3]
 SFColorRGBA;float[4];float[4];float[4]	
 SFDouble;double;double;double
 SFVec3d;double[3];double[3];double[3]
 SFTime;double;double;double
 SFString;const char*;const char*;String
 SFNode (***);X3dNode*;X3dNode*;X3dNode

 MFBool;short*;bool*;boolean[]
 MFInt32;int*;int*;int[]
 MFFloat;float*;float*;float[]
 MFVec2f;float*;float*;float[]
 MFVec3f;float*;float*;float[]
 MFVec4f;float*;float*;float[]
 MFRotation;float*;float*;float[]
 MFMatrix3f;float*;float*;float[]
 MFMatrix4f;float*;float*;float[]
 MFColor;float*;float*;float[]
 MFColorRGBA;float*;float*;float[]	
 MFDouble;double*;double*;double[]
 MFVec3d;double*;double*;double[]
 MFTime;double*;double*;double[]
 MFString;const char**;const char**;String[]
 MFNode (***);X3dNode**;X3dNode**;X3dNode[]
.TE
.br
(***) The "X3d" part of the name is the default, it can be replaced by the 
string of the \fBprefix\fP argument.
.br
For any MF* type field (and a SFImage type field) the number of int, float 
etc. values in the array is stored in a variable of the X3dNode 
struct/class composed from "m_", the name of the field and "_length" in 
case of a C/C++ export.
Java do not need such a variable, cause the length of a array is always 
available as the \.length component of the array.
.P
The scenegraph is a tree of nodes. The root of the scenegraph is
(similar to the white_dune internals) a VRML/X3D Group node named "root".
.br
In a Group node, the contained nodes are attached via a field named 
"children" of type MFNode.
.br
For example imagine the following VRML file:
.P
.nf
#VRML V2.0 utf8

Group
  {
  children
    [
    Group
      {
      }
    Group
      {
      }
    DEF NAME_OF_FOGNODE Fog
      {
      color 1 0.50000000 1
      }
    ]
  }
.fi
.P
If no \fBprefix\fP argument is used, the first node in a 
VRML/X3D file is represended in the exported C source as 
"root->children[0]" in the "X3dSceneGraph" struct.
.br
If the first node in the VRML/X3D file is also a Group node and contain
three other nodes, the third of this nodes is represended as 
"root->children[0]->children[2]" in the "X3dSceneGraph" struct.
.br
If the third of this nodes is a Fog node, the "color" field of the Fog node
is represended in the exported C source as 
"root->children[0]->children[2]->color" in the "X3dSceneGraph" struct.
.br
The type of the "color" field of the Fog node is SFColor. The SFColor type
is represented as a array of 3 floating point values in the C source, used
to store the red, green and blue part of the color.
.br
So the green part of the fog color is represended in the exported C source as
"root->children[0]->children[2]->color[1]" in the "X3dSceneGraph" struct.
.br
A C++ export would also use "root->children[0]->children[2]->color[1]"
in the  "X3dSceneGraph" class.
.br
A java export would similarly use "root.children[0].children[2].color[1]"
in the "X3dSceneGraph" class.
.P
There is a second way to access the fields of the Fog node.
.br
In VRML/X3D it is possible to name nodes with a "DEF" command. The string
behind the DEF command ("NAME_OF_FOGNODE" in the example) also occures
in the in the "X3dSceneGraph" struct and can be directly used to 
access the matching VRML/X3D data.
.br
So the green part of the fog color is represended in the exported C source as
"NAME_OF_FOGNODE->color[1]" in the "X3dSceneGraph" struct.
.br
A C++ export would also use "NAME_OF_FOGNODE->color[1]" in the 
"X3dSceneGraph" class.
.br
A java export would use similarly "NAME_OF_FOGNODE.color[1]" in the 
"X3dSceneGraph" class.
.br
A problem can occure, if the string behind the DEF command is a reserved
keyword in the target language. For example, the 3D modeller wings3d often
uses the DEF name "default" when exporting VRML97 files.
.br
In this case, the DEF name will be renamed (e.g. to "default1") and a warning 
would be written to standard error during the export.
.P
Beside the access of node data directly, there are also 2 sets of callbacks
to handle the data of a whole scenegraph (or a branch of it): 
a set of callbacks to render the content of the scenegraph branch 
("*RenderCallback") and a additional set of callbacks for other tasks
("*DoWithDataCallback").
.br
There are also callbacks to replace the functions, which per default
alltogether traverse the Scenegraph 
("*TreeRenderCallback" and "*TreeDoWithDataCallback").
.br
The callback mechanism and the scenegraph initialization differs from 
programming language to programming language.
.P
C:
.br
The scenegraph (default argument "X3d" for prefix) can be declarated with
.br
   struct X3dSceneGraph sceneGraph;
.br
and initialized with
.br
   X3dSceneGraphInit(&sceneGraph);
.br
A callback function for any X3D node type (like Fog, Text, IndexedFaceSet etc.)
has the declaration
.br
   void mycallbackFunction(X3dNode *self, void *data)
.br
To access the fields of the X3D node, you usually cast the X3dNode pointer
to a pointer to the type build from the string of the \fBprefix\fP argument 
(default "X3d") and the name of the X3D node type you access with this 
callback (e.g. X3dFog, X3dText, X3dIndexedFaceSet etc.).
.br
   X3dFog *node = (X3dFog *)self;
.br
   X3dText *node = (X3dText *)self;
.br
   X3dIndexedFaceSet *node = (X3dIndexedFaceSet *)self;
.br
   etc.
.br
With this variable "node" the fields the X3D node can be accessed.
.br
To install the callback, simply assign you function pointer to 
"callbackFunction" to a variable  build from the string of the 
\fBprefix\fP argument (default "X3d"), the the name of the X3D node
and the string "RenderCallback" or "DoWithDataCallback". E.g.
.br
   X3dFogRenderCallback = mycallbackFunction;
.br
   X3dTextDoWithDataCallback = mycallbackFunction;
.br
   X3dIndexedFaceSetRenderCallback = mycallbackFunction;
.br
To run the Render or DoWithData functions with the scenegraph tree, just use
.br
   X3dGroupTreeDoWithData(&sceneGraph.root, NULL);
.br
Instead of using NULL, other data can be passed to the "data" argument of
the callback functions.
.P
C++:
.br
The callback mechanism is very similar to the C mechanism.
.br
The main difference is the storage of the callback functions. While the
callbackfunctions in C are stored in global space, the C++ callbackfunctions
are stored in the static part of the matching node type.
.br
Instead of using 
.br
   X3dFogRenderCallback = mycallbackFunction; // C
.br
a C++ program would use
.br
   X3dFog::renderCallback = mycallbackFunction; // C++
.br
In C++ there is no need to call a initialization function for "sceneGraph". 
A constructor is called when the
.br
   X3dSceneGraph sceneGraph;
.br
declaration is used.
.br
To run the Render or DoWithData functions with the scenegraph 
tree "sceneGraph.render(NULL);" or "sceneGraph.doWithData(NULL);" is used.
.br
NULL can be replaced by other data, that will be passed to the "data" argument 
of the callback function.
.P
java:
.br
The java callback mechanism is a bit different, it is based on inheritance.
.br
The callback function is part of a class, that extends a matching 
class:
.br
   class  MyCallbackClass extends X3dFogRenderCallback {
.br
      public void render(X3dNode node) {
.br
The new class is used in the following example:
.br
   MyCallbackClass myCallback = new MyCallbackClass();
.br
   X3dSceneGraph sceneGraph = new X3dSceneGraph();
.br
   X3dText.setX3dTextRenderCallback(myCallback);
.br
   sceneGraph.render();
.P
With the the \fB-manyclasses\fP option, the last line changes to 
"X3dSceneGraph.render();". The access to a node with a DEF command in
the x3dv/vrml file changes also to a static variable in a similar way.
.P
Finally there are additional callbacks ("*ProcessEventCallback") to process
events distributed by VRML/X3D ROUTE commands.
.br
A example: a usual animation of a moving Sphere, is driven by a event from
a TimeSensor node. There is a ROUTE command to send the event into a 
PositionInterpolator node, which calculate the matching translation of the
Sphere. There is also a ROUTE command to send the translation event to
a Transform node.
.br
In the source code export, the inputOnly/outputOnly events are stored as
usual variables. The functions used for *ProcessEventCallbacks should
read the inputOnly event variables and write the outputOnly event 
variables. 
.br
Similar to the sceneGraph. render() function, there is a 
sceneGraph. X3dProcessEvent() function.
.br
During the source code export, white_dune searches for the node (and similar
nodes) with output events, but no input event. 
.br
The exported code calls 
X3dProcessEvent() with this first node of a ROUTE. This should generate 
data in the outputOnly event variables of this first node of a ROUTE. 
.br
By following the ROUTE, the exported code copies the data from the 
outputOnly event variable of the first node to the inputOnly event variable
of the second node of a ROUTE.  
.br
The exported code calls X3dProcessEvents() with the second node of a ROUTE 
to create data in the outputOnly event variable of the second node.
.br
By following the ROUTE, the exported code copies the data from the
outputOnly event variable of the second node to the inputOnly event variable
of the third node of a ROUTE.
.br
And so on.
.br
At the end of the ROUTE chain, X3dProcessEvent() should process the 
inputOnly event varibles of the last node in the ROUTE chain.
.br
In a simple example, the following X3DV file is exported:
.P
.nf
#X3D V3.0 utf8
PROFILE Interchange

DEF Transform1 Transform {
  children
    Shape {
      appearance Appearance {
        material Material {
        }
      }
      geometry Box {
      }
    }
}

DEF TimeSensor1 TimeSensor {
  cycleInterval 5
  loop TRUE
}

DEF PositionInterpolator1 PositionInterpolator {
  key [
    0
    1
  ]
  keyValue [
    0 0 0
    1 0 0
  ]
}

ROUTE TimeSensor1.fraction_changed TO PositionInterpolator1.set_fraction
ROUTE PositionInterpolator1.value_changed TO Transform1.set_translation
.fi
.P
The most simple code, that could be used to implement this (exactly this)
PositionInterpolator would be in C (with prefix "X3d"):
.P
.nf
int PositionInterpolatorCallback(X3dNode *node, const char *eventName,
                                 void* extraData)
{
   struct X3dPositionInterpolator *data = (struct X3dPositionInterpolator*)node;
   data->value_changed[0] = data->set_fraction;
   data->value_changed[0] = 0;
   data->value_changed[0] = 0;
   return 1;
}
.fi 
.P
Just like the Render callback functions, the callback is used with
.br
X3dPositionInterpolatorProcessEventCallback = PositionInterpolatorCallback;
.br
The matching code in C++ is rather similar
.P
.nf
bool PositionInterpolatorCallback(X3dNode *node, const char *eventName,
                                  void* extraData)
{
   X3dPositionInterpolator *data = (X3dPositionInterpolator*)node;
   data->value_changed[0] = data->set_fraction;
   data->value_changed[0] = 0;
   data->value_changed[0] = 0;
   return true;
}
.fi 
.P
The callback is used with
.br
X3dPositionInterpolator::processEventCallback = PositionInterpolatorCallback;
.br
The matching code in java uses inheritance
.P
.nf
class PositionInterpolatorCallback extends X3dPositionInterpolatorProcessEventCallback {
    public boolean processEvent(X3dNode node, String eventName) {
        X3dPositionInterpolator data = (X3dPositionInterpolator)node;
        data->value_changed[0] = data->set_fraction;
        data->value_changed[0] = 0;
        data->value_changed[0] = 0;
        return true;
    }
}
.fi
.P
The callback is used with
.P
.nf
PositionInterpolatorCallback callback = new PositionInterpolatorCallback();
X3dPositionInterpolator.setX3dPositionInterpolatorProcessEventCallback(callback);
.fi
.P
The return value of the ProcessEventCallbacks (1/0 for C, true/false for 
C++/java) tells the event distributing system (VRML/X3D ROUTE commands)
if there is a generated event that needs to be distributed to the next
VRML/X3D node or not.
.P
It is possible to use a VRML/X3D Script node to process data in C, C++ or
java. 
.br
Similar to inlined javascript/ecmascript code, the "url" field of a Script 
node contains strings with a header.
.br
The syntax of the code in C/C++/java is very similar to the code in a
ProcessEvent callback. The only difference is the node name 
(PositionInterpolator in the callbacks above). Each Script node in a 
VRML/X3D file has another set of events and fields. A Script node is useless
without a DEF name, therefore the node name is replaced by the concatenation
of the String "Script_" and the DEF name of the Script node.
.P
If no \fB-scriptHeaderC\fP/\fB-scriptHeaderC++\fP/\fB-scriptHeaderJava\fP
option is used, the Script node that replaces the PositionInterpolator
in the examples above would be:
.P
.nf
DEF Script1 Script {
  eventIn SFFloat float1_in
  eventOut SFVec3f vec3f1_out
  url [
    "javascript:
    // eventOut SFVec3f vec3f1_out //
    function float1_in(value) {
       // value  SFFloat
       vec3f1_out = new SFVec3f(value, 0, 0);
    }
    "

    "c:
    struct X3dScript_Script1 *self = node;
    self->vec3f1_out[0] = self->float1_in;
    self->vec3f1_out[1] = 0;
    self->vec3f1_out[2] = 0;
    "

    "c++:
    X3dScript_Script1 *self = (X3dScript_Script1 *)node;
    self->vec3f1_out[0] = self->float1_in;
    self->vec3f1_out[1] = 0;
    self->vec3f1_out[2] = 0;
    "

    "java:
    X3dScript_Script1 script = (X3dScript_Script1)node;
    script.vec3f1_out[0] = script.float1_in;
    script.vec3f1_out[1] = 0;
    script.vec3f1_out[2] = 0;
    "
    ]
  }
.fi
.P
When you use a Script node in the Wonderland module export and the java
code needs a extra "import" statement, create a special 
WonderlandImportJava export data container node and add the import 
statement to the "code" field.
.P
See the directories docs/export_example_c, docs/export_example_c++ and
docs/export_example_java of the white_dune source archive for examples.
.SH EXAMPLES
.P
.LP
.TP
dune -nostereo
.br
start dune this way, if you have a stereo capable visual,
but no shutterglases or other quadbuffer based technology.
.LP
.TP
dune -xinput magellan -allxyz=10,100,,0.0000002 -xinput dialbox-1 -x=0 -y=2 -z=4 -xrot=1 -yrot=3 -zrot=5 -all=1000,,wheel
.br
starts dune with a magellan xinputdevice with factor 10, acceleration 100 
and a ignore value of 0.0000002 on the xyz axes 
and a dialbox device with 
.br
x axis = 0. axis 
.br
y axis = 2. axis 
.br
z axis = 4. axis
.br
rotation around x axis = 1. axis 
.br
rotation around y axis = 3. axis 
.br
rotation around y axis = 5. axis
.br
all axes use factor 1000 and all to not deliver zero if released
.LP
.TP
dune -joystick /dev/input/js0 -z=,3 -axes=3
.br
starts dune with a linux joystick, set acceleration of the z axis to 3
and disables the 4. (5., 6., \.\.\.) axis.
.LP
.TP
dune -xinput magellan -z=3 -xrot=2 -none=2
.br
starts dune with a xinput/magellan device, swapping axis number 2 and
axis number 3, with axis number 2 disabled.
.LP
.TP
dune -nxtdials
.br
starts dune with a mindstorms nxt usb device, all axes are automatic handled
as wheels.
.LP
.TP
dune -aflock /dev/ttyS1 -numbirds 2 -master 1 -wand 2 -tracker 3
.br
starts dune with a Ascension Flock of Birds.
Master transmitter (a Extended Range Controller (ERC)) at FBB adress 1 
is connected to the serial device /dev/ttyS1, use 2 Birds, 
one attached to a "3D Mouse" device at FBB adress 2 and one attached 
to a head tracking device at FBB adress 3.
.LP
.TP
dune -wonderland wonderland/modules -manyclasses Test.x3dv
.br
Exports the content of Test.x3dv as java source for wonderland 0.5 to the
directory wonderland/modules/exportX3dv/test.
.br
To compile the java source to a wonderland module 
wonderland/modules/exportX3dv/test/dist/test.jar change to the directory
wonderland/modules/exportX3dv/test and use "ant" or "ant deploy".
.SH FILES
.P
.nf
.ta
.B $HOME/.dunerc
default file to load/store settings 
(see \fBDUNERC\fP environment variable for more information)
.TP
.B $HOME/.dune_crash_*_*.wrl
stores the vrml file in case of a crash
.P
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
\fBDUNERC\fP filename to load/store details of dunes screen layout and 
settings of the "options" menupoint.
.br
If this filename is not writable, settings are only loaded, not stored.
.br
If \fBDUNERC\fP is not set, the file \fB$HOME/.dunerc\fP is used under 
Linux/UNIX/MacOSX or the registry under Micro$oft Windows.
.TP
\fBDUNEDOCS\fP  path to documentation directory
.TP
\fBLANG\fP  the first two characters of then environment variable \fBLANG\fP 
are compared to the ISO 3166 country shortcut of the supported 
languages.
For example, if \fBLANG\fP is set to de_DE, german menu, dialogs and 
errormessages are used.
.P
.SH COPYRIGHT
    Dune, graphical vrml97 editor and animation tool
    Copyright (C) 2000-2002  Stephen F. White and others
.br
    This program is free software; you can redistribute it 
    and/or modify it under the terms of the 
    GNU General Public License 
    as published by the Free Software Foundation; either 
    version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later 
    version.
.P
.SH BUGS
Dune need valid vrml97/x3dv code to work, it can not load a invalid 
VRML97/X3DV file.
.br
White_dune can load XML encoded X3D files via a translator.
.br
Use the menupoint Options -> Input Settings... to configure a
X3D/XML to X3DV translator.
.br
dune is software in development, it is not 100% free of bugs.
Unsucessful crashes should be rare, lucky crashes allow to get 
back the data. (see "EXIT STATUS").
.br
Currently not all VRML97/X3D nodes are displayed (e.g. MovieTexture, 
NurbsSweptSurface or NurbsSwungSurface) or displayed correctly 
(e.g. Text or Viewpoint).
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit status is 0 for sucessfull operation.
.br
Exit status is 1 if inputfile can not be sucessfully read or 
other initialisation error.
.br
Exit status is 2 in case of a X11 server crash.
.br
Exit status is 11 in case of a X11 initialisation error.
.br
Exit status is 97 in case one of the inputfiles is a VRML 1 file (the VRML 1
format is not supported).
.br
In case of a coredump/crash, the exit status can be undefined.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
In case of a crash (e.g. X11 server crash or signal (coredump) in case of a 
internal error), dune tries to write it's contence to the file 
$HOME/.dune_crash_*_*.wrl. This works in most cases, but not if the 
internal data structure has been destroyed. When white_dune is restarted, 
the filename is shown in the "recent files" part of the program menu.
.br
Intermediate files .dune* files (e.g. for preview) are only deleted when
white_dune exits normally. In case of a crash, this files remain.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
illegal2vrml(1),
javac(1),
java(1),
Xvfb(1),
xterm(1),
FreeWRL(1),
cosmoplayer(1),
cosmoworlds(1),
.TP
.URL "http://www.web3d.org/x3d/specifications/vrml/" "ISO/IEC 14772"
.TP
.URL "http://www.web3d.org/specifications/" "ISO/IEC 19776-2"
.SH AUTHORS
Stephen F. White and others
.br
See README file for details
